# Leverhulme Trust research project grants: _moving camera bodies_

## abstract

There is growing evidence that our physical and psychological well-being is compromised by overuse of smartphones. These compromises are underpinned by a paradox: human bodies are predisposed for movement, while smartphone screens demand attention made possible by chronic stillness. _Moving Camera Bodies_ is speculative research that aims to examine how our bodies and smartphones currently meet and effect each other, and to experiment with how they _might_ meet and effect each other. It will use the expertise of dance movement specialists to develop practical field experiments that explore these contradictory cultural technologies and experiences: the body that needs movement, and the smartphone that demands stillness and attention. The research will then use auto-ethnographic methods to analyse the practice-based experiments, and thereby deepen our understanding of the corporeal inter-relationships between smartphones, vision, proprioception, movement and stillness.

- is the aim clear?
- why does this research need to happen?
- what problem(s) does this research uncover or aim to solve?


## research design 

### aim

To examine how our bodies and smartphones currently meet and effect each other, and to imagine new possibilities for how they _might_ meet and effect each other


### questions

1. _Feeling:_ How does it feel in our bodies -- somatically -- to use a smartphone? 
2. _Limits and affordances:_ How are movements, postures, gestures and physical experiences limited or facilitated by smartphones? What types of experiences are generated when the smartphone and its camera are consciously used to inform, disrupt and complicate the corporeal-sensorial possibilities of the body? 
3. _Adaptation and generation:_ How can movement and somatic practices be adapted and used to generate novel or alternate bodily patterns or habits in relationship to the smartphone? 
4. _Non-visual senses:_ The smartphone is both camera (lens) and mirror. We see ourselves and others through and in it. How might this dominant and physically limited way of _seeing_ be adapted and reconfigured through somatic practices that privilege non-visual senses?


#### objectives

_Feeling:_

1. generate ethnographic data from movement specialists that creates a vocabulary exploring how it feels to use a smartphone
2. survey current sociological literature that examines experiences of smartphone use

_Limits and differences:_

3. 


#### methods

- rationale: why this method? what do we get from it? 
    + experiential 
    + understanding through doing (citation/evidence/precedent)
    + what we 'know' through dance practices (ie what dance understand might bring to the project)

"somehow turn up outside the bounds of what was conceivable."[Foster, in @kolcio_somatic_2005 p.121]

experimental qualitative research methods: 

RQ1 Feelings: 
+ ethnographic interviews with four dancers/movement experts exploring their felt experiences of using smartphones
+ analysis of transcriptions from interviews to tease out key themes 
+ upload interview transcriptions online as OA resource
+ develop scholarly article that shares and juxtaposes key themes from interviews with key ideas from previous scholarship about relationship between smartphones and our bodies

RQ2 Limits and affordances:
+ complete practice-research fieldwork to create lexicon of body-based limits and affordances in relation to smartphone 
+ use practice-research to experiment with the smartphone and its camera as a source for body-based understandings and experiences
+ transcribe/record these experiments and share online

RQ3 Adaptation and generation:
+ use practice-research fieldwork to generate series of practices that sensitise our bodies to the smartphone
+ use practice-research fieldwork to create a set of body-based 'activities' that up-end our moving and bodily relationship to the smartphone

RQ4 Non-visual senses:
+ examine current cross-disciplinary scholarship (anthropology, sociology, psychology, somatic practices, visual culture) to reveal key ideas at the intersection of oculo-centric habitus, photo-visual culture, and non-visual senses (haptic, kinesthetic, proprioceptive, aural)
+ use creative practice-research experimentation to examine the friction or tension generated by using sensate (or body-based 'felt') strategies to explore the hyper-visuality of smartphone culture



- literature/field analysis 
- fieldwork
    + ethnographic interviews on subject of smartphones and our moving bodies (with artists and scholars)
        * artist who made sculptures of hands (gestures)
    + experimental workshops as research space/environment
    + experimental practice-research (with KM, OB, NB, CL): 
        * experiments in screen-based anti/non/-movement
        * combining first-person and third-person cameras (phone and go-pro mounted with gnarwhal)


### possible outputs

- develop range of public facing (including non-traditional) research outputs
- develop various writing practices (blog posting and traditional scholarship) that share key (emergent) ideas and communicate research understandings 
- something about aesthetic, process-orientated (through creative practice), experiential and ethnographic 

1. Develop (ready for publication) a scholarly article examining how it feels to use a smartphone
2. _smartphone and its camera's effects on the body:_ create annotated video lexicon of body gestures, actions and possibilities that are limited or afforded by the smartphone and its camera (use MotionBank?). This collection will be recorded, transcribed, organised and uploaded to project website
3. _body's effects on the camera:_ generate a series of body-based practices or activities that question, expand and transform our conventional corporeal relationship to the smartphone. This collection will be recorded, transcribed, organised and uploaded to the project website
4. artistic output - screendance (coming from RQ 2 and 3)
5. non-visual senses. creative possibilities of device as camera and the body (intersection) possibly use footage or stills from interviews as well? - visual essay
6. project website, including project blog



## publications 

>demonstrate knowledge of other papers published by other authors in this subject; give examples of current work being carried out

Mention mix of papers, screenings, films -- mixed modes.

Ashley, T., Cherry, R., Pell, L., 2016. Embodiment and Digital Interactivity: Towards Posthuman Somatic Practices. Journal of Dance and Somatic Practices 8, 3–9. https://doi.org/10.1386/jdsp.8.1.3_2

Barker, Jennifer M. The Tactile Eye: Touch and the Cinematic Experience. Berkeley: U of California P, 2009. Print.

Barua, O., Barua, N., McPherson, K., Ellis, S., 2016. We Record Ourselves.

Bédard, P., 2015. Disembodied Perspective: Third-Person Images in GoPro Videos. Alphaville 9.

Cooper-Albright, A., 2019. How to Land: Finding Ground in an Unstable World. Oxford University Press, New York, NY, United States of America.

Ellis, Simon, 2012. Through Screens. The International Journal of Screendance 2, 86–88.

Ellis, Simon, 2018. Between Faces. https://www.skellis.net/between-faces [Desktop presentation]

Ellis, Simon, 2020. Two People Together. https://www.skellis.net/two-people-together [Screendance]

Gil, J., Lepecki, A., 2006. Paradoxical Body. TDR: The Drama Review 50, 21–35.

Hopkins, S., 2014. The Eye of the Hand: embodied Filmmaking as movement Practice, in: Bloom, K., Galanter, M., Reeve, S. (Eds.), Embodied Lives: Reflections on the Influence of Suprapto Suryodarmo and Amerta Movement. Triarchy, Axminster, Devon.


Ingold, T., 2013. Making, Anthropology, Archaeology, Art and Architecture. Routledge, London.

Loussouarn, C., 2017. Dancing with Nature Off the Leash, in: von Zinnenburg, K. (Ed.), Botanical Drift: Economic Botany and Its Plant Protagonist. Sternberg Press, Berlin, pp. 64–68.

Loussouarn, C. 2019. <http://somaticstoolkit.coventry.ac.uk/loussouarn-dancing-with-the-camera>

Manning, E., 2016. The Minor Gesture, Thought in the Act. Duke University Press, Durham London.

Marks, L.U., 2000. The Skin of the Film: Intercultural Cinema, Embodiment, and the Senses. Duke University Press, Durham, N.C.

Paumgarten, N., 2014. We are a Camera: Experience and Memory in the Age of GoPro [WWW Document]. The New Yorker. URL https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/09/22/camera (accessed 4.21.20).

Sheets-Johnstone, M., 2011. The primacy of movement, Expanded 2nd ed. ed, Advances in consciousness research (AiCR). John Benjamins Pub. Co, Amsterdam ; Philadelphia.

Simondon, G., 2012. Being and Technology. Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh.

Sobchack, Vivian. “Toward Inhabited Space: The Semiotic Structure of Camera Movement in the Cinema.” Semiotica 41.1–4 (1982): 317–35. Print.

Sobchack, V. (2016) ‘The Scene of the Screen: Envisioning Photographic, Cinematic, and Electronic “Presence”,’ Post-Cinema: Theorizing 21st-Century Film. (eds.) Shane Denson & Julia Leyda. Sussex, UK: REFRAME Books. Retrieved from: www.reframe.sussex.ac.uk/post-cinema/2-1-sobchack/.

Soloway, J., 2016. The Female Gaze. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pnBvppooD9I



## co-applicants

## finance

### general guidance

### salary/budget guidance

### replacement teaching

### staff costs

### associated cost guidance


# edit bin


- to employ the skills, experiences and expertise of dance artist-researchers as 'tools' for speculative exploration into _human experiences with smartphones_
- to adapt and use experimental movement practices to examine the ways in which the smartphone limits and affords possibilities for movement, sensing and seeing
- to imagine and communicate new or different body-based relationships to the smartphone 
- employ dance and somatic practices as a strategy to expand understanding of the role and impact of smartphone screens on daily life **make this one more specific**

are being changed by our use of smartphones, and that these changes are occurring within our capacity to notice them.

Smartphone screens demand attention made possible by chronic stillness, and human bodies are predisposed for movement. _Moving Camera Bodies_ is speculative research that examines this contradictory situation. The research employs the expertise of dance movement specialists in a series of practical field experiments to examine the ways these contemporary cultural technologies of movement and stillness intersect. The experiments involve applying sensate non-visual movement practices to the hyper-visuality and staticity afforded by the smartphone. The research aims to deepen our understanding of the corporeal inter-relationships between smartphones, vision, proprioception, movement and stillness. 


to examine this contradiction. These specialists will 
the ways these contemporary cultural experiences of movement and stillness intersect. 

problem: to investigate this friction. The friction is cultural; the friction is contemporary; the friction is taking over the world. 

The smartphone is also more than a technological extension to our body. That is, it is more than something that allows “human beings to see, touch, feel, hear, manipulate and understand what to date has remained invisible to the senses or hidden in matter, the body and the universe”.[@davidson_somatics_2013 p.5]
